Ladies and gentlemen, a
poet once wrote that a lifetime is like a
river, how many stand watching from the riverbank? To
cross the river, one must rely on a ferry; life's journey requires countless
steps, relying on others to guide. Yes, ladies
and gentlemen, from ancient times to the present day, the
tradition of remembering one's roots, the spirit of
gratitude and the lamp of gratitude are considered the building blocks of
human morality, something that each
of us must remember. On
November 20th,
Vietnamese Teachers' Day, we
remember the contributions of the
teachers who have
accompanied us in school.
Besides them, we also have teachers
in the Dharma and those who practice the Dharma.
How should we express our
gratitude to our teachers? This
is perhaps a major question for those who
practice the Dharma. To resolve
this question, Huong Lan cordially invites you to listen
to the sharing of Ms. Pham
Thi Yen, Dharma name Tam Chieu Hoan Quan,
head of the Quoc Vang Club practicing
Luc Hoa. Yes, I
greet you, Ms. Yen. On behalf of all of
you...  I would like to express my
most sincere gratitude to you, teacher. I know that
despite your busy schedule, you always
take the time to
answer our questions. I am deeply
grateful for your kindness. To
begin today's sharing session, I
would like to read the following question:
Question 1: Hello teacher. With
November 20th approaching, I would like to express my gratitude
to you, the head of the Golden
Chrysanthemum Club practicing the Six Harmonies. I wish you always good
health so that you can spread the Dharma throughout the
world. I have a question for you,
teacher. Regarding teachers who teach
us, we send them thank-you
notes and small gifts to
show our gratitude and study hard so as
not to disappoint them.
How should those who practice the Dharma show their devotion to those who teach them? I
respectfully thank you for your kindness. Thank you for
your question, Huong Lan. I
would also like to greet all of you and send my regards.  With sincere gratitude, I extend my thanks
to all the teachers who have
tirelessly taught and nurtured their students, making
this world a better place and
society a
better place. It is
thanks to the hard work and
dedication of the teachers that I will speak of my
gratitude to the teachers who
taught me the most, and then to the teachers who taught me
moral values. As Huong Nan asked
me when I was still in
school, not everyone respects their
teachers. It's not always like that, but
after they've experienced life, those
students, even the most rebellious ones,
become
parents themselves. Only then do they understand how stubborn their children are,
how much hardship their teachers endured, and they truly
appreciate the sacrifices their teachers made for
them. Therefore, I say that in every person,
no matter how bad they may be, there
is still a seed of gratitude in their heart, a
seed of respect for their teachers.
I once attended a
class reunion, and there were also classmates who
had grown up...  They say things like, "Back then, she was like
this, she was like that," but
the tone of voice when her friends say
it isn't hateful, it's because they've been
calling their teacher "that lady" or "that old
lady" since high school
or even lower grades,
so they haven't changed their way of addressing her.
But deep down,
she sees a lot of understanding,
respect, and
gratitude. For example,
sentences like this: "Back then, we were
really too bossy, but
in school, we didn't realize we were being too bossy, we
didn't realize we were being too bossy."
I have a memory about the
bossiness of high school students. I remember that year, I was
in 10th grade, and I was
already the class president. We were just
starting 10th grade, and we did
n't really understand each other or become friends yet. There
was a
teacher, a Literature teacher, and I have to admit
that she taught...  Literature is very boring,
meaning she only teaches the knowledge in the
textbook. Anyone who has studied Literature knows that
if the
Literature teacher doesn't have good examples, a good
voice, or a
logical and engaging way of analyzing, the
students find it very boring and sleepy.
Therefore, the teacher isn't
well-liked by the students. At that time,
she didn't really participate in
their activities, but the
students were very loud. She was a
teacher, but her income was very low because of
the need to make a living, so she sold
alcohol. Some students in the class
shouted, "Teacher A, her name is Teacher A!" Then, as the time approached, they all shouted in
unison, "Teacher A sells illegal alcohol! Teacher A
sells illegal alcohol! Teacher A sells illegal alcohol!" and so on.
They kept shouting, "Teacher A doesn't participate in
that, and she never said a word, she did
n't agree, she didn't agree, but she
couldn't object because she had to
live in the classroom,
she couldn't object to the students. Or like this...
That was okay because at that time there was nothing
that allowed me to do that.
It's like
you guys in the class, you can't say, '
You can't do this, you ca
n't do that,' you can't
say that. So, I didn't
comply, but I had to stay silent. I had to stay
silent.
Then, one day during
her class, this action was
extremely outrageous, not just outrageous, but
outrageous. I was sitting at my desk at the back of the classroom.
That day, somehow, the teacher called me
up to check my homework. As soon as I entered the classroom at the beginning of the lesson, she
called Pham Thi Yen to the
board. I walked from the first desk to the
second desk, and they all jumped up, stopping in their tracks. '
Firecrackers, firecrackers!' Then she
pointed, and my eyes looked down at
this diagonal corner. 'This diagonal corner, there's a pile of scraps of
paper.' She said, '
Firecrackers,
firecrackers!' She pointed to that spot.
At that moment, instinctively, 'Yes, teacher, I did
n't know the lesson.' For the first time in my
life...  When I went to school and answered that question, I said, "
Teacher, I don't know the lesson." The teacher was very
surprised, and that action
of hers—standing at the corner of the blackboard—
made the teacher walk down to desk number
one, the desk below, and ask, "
Why don't you know the lesson?" I replied,
trembling, "Yes, teacher,
I don't know the lesson." Then she yelled, "
How can you not know the lesson?" and a huge
firecracker went off.
If I had been standing there, that would have hit me
in the face, and I would have been taken to the
principal's office. Of course, that would have caused a
huge uproar.
But even today, I ca
n't explain why it happened like
this. I should have been the
one involved, the one who should have been
brought in and punished.
Firstly, the class president, secondly, the action
of the student saying, "Teacher, you don't know the lesson," clearly shows there was a conspiracy.
Now, analyzing it this way,
I must have acted within that conspiracy.
I don't understand why
I wasn't called in or to the principal's office,
but only today.  After class ended, when I went home,
I saw my classmates cleaning the
school's restroom, which was
very dirty. I didn't
ask why they had to clean it; I just assumed I did
n't understand what was going on. It wasn't until
later, after I
graduated, that I started to think about it. I
didn't ask them anything, but I figured they probably
accepted their
mistakes and were automatically
punished. It did
n't affect me at all,
and I
didn't know where they got the punishment
from or who did it. I didn't investigate
further. So, as a
teacher,
how
many mischievous things like that do you experience in your life? They get scolded and ridiculed.
I'll
tell you about those mischievous things again when I finish 12th grade. And I'm sure
you all have experienced many too.
That day, the graduation exams were approaching,
so
I went to class. I saw the classroom was empty.  There was only
this girl, the class secretary, and
one other student left, that's three students in
total. Was anyone else there? When the teacher arrived and there was no
one, she asked, "Ms. Yen,
where did the whole class go today?" The student replied, "I do
n't know, I don't know where we went." The
next day, during the homeroom period, the new homeroom teacher asked, "Ms. Yen, where did the class go yesterday?" The
student replied, "I don't know, I came to
class and didn't see anyone." Then, she did
n't bother to punish them. It turned out it was the
whole class! Because before, she
never agreed with and never sided
with those who skipped class.
She and the class secretary, who were very
close friends, and another student, never skipped
class. But it turned out these students skipped class
and then, seeing the teacher, started
shouting, "Unity,
great unity! Success, great success!" She had to
punish them for that crime. Isn't that
terrible? It's
so hard being a teacher. The homeroom teacher
only scolded them for a while, what else could she do? And
those students were really too
harsh!  The other day, the class organized a
mountain climbing trip. But then the next day, they skipped school.
If they had skipped school, the offense would have been
minor, less serious, but then I saw the
homeroom teacher yelling like that. Then it was
over, and the other students just left. I'm just an
outsider, there's no problem.
That's how I realized that
teachers really need to have character first – the
character of support and forgiveness – to be able to do their job and
stand firm in the
teaching profession. Otherwise, they'll be
stressed, right? A person who's
stubborn will be stressed and frustrated.
A problematic student, they're
problematic for three years, not just one.
They're bad for all three years I've been their homeroom teacher,
not just one year. And when they're
bad, they curse the homeroom teacher
first, they do bad things, and they make the
homeroom teacher
suffer a lot. And then their reputation
suffers too. This is what she said about the
good side. Of course, there are
also teachers who don't
fully possess the ethics of a teacher; it's
both sides.  She said that whether
or not teachers possess full ethical standards,
what they
go through is still dealing with very mischievous students,
from high school to middle school. Elementary school is somewhat better, but middle and high school
are incredibly difficult. It's not that the
students' gratitude
is limited; it's not just about
small gifts or
small thank-you notes. In fact,
deep within a person's heart lies a sense of
regret and gratitude. Therefore,
ethical and responsible teachers
will live in the hearts of their
students for the rest of their lives. She also has
teachers who have left a deep impression on her. Even now, she still
remembers the
enthusiasm and dedication of her elementary school
homeroom teacher, her middle school math teacher, her high school homeroom teacher, and
several other
teachers who have left a lasting impression on her heart.  She reminded me of my mistake, and it
was very profound.
This gratitude doesn't stop; it has no
time limit and no spatial separation.
No matter where I go,
the image of my teachers remains with
me, nurturing within me
a heart that feels remorse. If it's a heart of regret, like
when my child is misbehaving,
that feeling of remorse resurfaces. Therefore,
teachers are always the ones who help
me cultivate that feeling of remorse
or repentance—that is, a kind heart. Even if
my actions towards them were unwholesome, they are
still helping
me cultivate that kind heart. That's
why teachers are so precious,
extremely precious, whether they teach
a lot or a little knowledge, whether
they are perfect or not.
For me, the
moments they brought me benefit
will live on in my heart forever.
So, gratitude is
boundless; it has no limits. It has no
limits.  Continuing from generation
to generation, our grateful hearts
will lead us to meet again the
teachers we have been grateful to. This is according to the
law of karma in Buddhism; we will meet again, and
this grateful heart will
lead to repaying our teachers.
Therefore, the teaching profession is a
very noble profession, not just bringing
benefits to teachers in this life, but
also in many future lives. In the operation of
karma, the heart of this student
will lead the student to have a form
in some lifetime to repay their
teachers. Therefore, being a teacher
is a good profession,
generating blessings for
teachers in this life and for
teachers in many future lives.
Therefore, a teacher who teaches knowledge is
also a very noble teacher,
even more noble on a level that brings
transformative benefits to the student in the present life. The teacher
is a teacher of the
Dharma in Buddhism. In the
Dhammapada, there is a
Brahmin named along with 400...  The disciple
challenged the Buddha, and after the
challenge, a
celestial being caused him to become
mentally disturbed. He immediately realized
he would lose to the Buddha, so the
Buddha, that is, at that moment, tested his
supernatural powers. The story of Journey to the West depicts Tang
Sanzang sitting on a
pillar, and the demon also sitting on the pillar—
this is based on the title in the scripture.
After realizing he was going to lose, the demon
drew
his face on the riverbank and said, "
If
you don't see me come up, I will be reborn in heaven."
He jumped in and
died. The 400 disciples,
seeing their master not coming up, thought he would be
reborn in heaven, and all 400 jumped
into the water to be reborn in heaven. That
's also a teacher, but a teacher who
leads to suffering. When they die, they will
realize it wasn't heaven, so
they will know it was a deception and will harbor
resentment and
hatred. What about the teachers who teach the Dharma?  The teacher
guides us towards genuine virtuous conduct,
meaning they help us perform
good deeds that will bring us
good karma. These teachers
provide methods for us to
think, speak, and act in a way that yields
beneficial results in the present moment—that is,
blessings for our birth and guidance for
many lifetimes to be filled with happiness
and peace. How should we show our gratitude?
How should we express our gratitude to this teacher? Will they still
accept a bouquet of flowers? Will they accept
a gift? This teacher
has already distanced themselves from the pleasures of flowers and gifts. Those
teachers who want to impart the
liberating teachings of the Buddha
have seen the danger of the
beauty of flowers and the peril of the
fruit. Having clearly seen
this danger, they have abandoned it and
practiced the holy path of liberation.
What will they hope for from us? They will
hope that we will accept the
Buddha's teachings, practice them, and
achieve the path to
liberation, leading us to happiness and freedom from
suffering.  This is the heartfelt wish of the
Buddhist teachers. To
express this gratitude, how can we do it?
We
listen attentively to and contemplate what our
teachers have taught us, and we diligently practice what the
Buddha's teachings reveal to
us. Through diligent practice, we achieve
results: our minds grow
stronger, becoming less evil each day, and
more virtuous.
This is the
gift we offer,
not just to our teachers, but to all the Buddhas.
That is
the aspiration of our teachers, and it is also the
heartfelt wish of the Buddha. The Buddha wants
us to be free from suffering and all sentient beings to be free from
suffering. That is the boundless compassion
of the Buddhas towards us. Therefore,
all Buddhists who follow the Dharma in this world should, on
November 20th, show gratitude and repay their
teachers by
practicing virtuous deeds, controlling
their minds more, practicing the
Dharma more, repenting more,
abandoning evil, and diligently practicing
virtuous deeds.  November 20th is
the way to express gratitude to the teachers who taught
us the path to liberation. Yes, ma'am. I humbly thank you for your
kindness. It is truly
a lifetime of gratitude for your teachings. I believe that even the most grateful teachers
cannot repay the
kindness of our parents who gave us life and raised us to
adulthood. Our teachers
impart knowledge to us,
equipping us to confidently bước
into life. Even more important are the spiritual masters and
teachers of the Buddha's teachings who
nurtured us with their
teachings, ensuring our happiness in
future lives. Through your answer,
Hương Lan is confident that you have all had your
questions answered. We will continue to
practice the gratitude we owe to our parents, teachers, and spiritual masters. For those who, for
whatever reason, such as geographical distance
or mental obstacles, cannot
send a
flower or a small gift to their
teachers, let us use our sincere hearts to express our gratitude.
That is the
most precious expression of gratitude we can offer them.
On the occasion of November 20th, our teacher, Ms. Huong Lan,
would like to express our
deepest gratitude to her. Although she is not
a teacher, what we have
learned from her is something no
school can provide. Thank you
for watching Huong Lan's program.
We wish you all happiness and
joy from the bottom of
our hearts. Namo Buddha Shakyamuni.